Captain Poldark.
Dr Enys! You survived the journey?
Missed the riots in London,
but caught them in Exeter!
We're uncivilized here,
let me warn you.
I've seen worse.
You've saved worse!
Come meet my friends.
Paul, Zacky, Mark,
this is Dwight Enys.
I have him to thank
for patching me up!
I trust my skill's
improved since then.
Dwight is here to make
a study of mine diseases.
There's no shortage of subjects!
Do you suffer yourself?
Heart and lungs of an ox!
Then I hope we'll have no call
to meet, except socially.
You must come meet my wife.
- Demelza, my friend, Dr Dwight Enys.
- Ma'am.
'Twas you that mended his face?
Your fame precedes you, sir!
My infamy, you mean!
I intend to keep my head down here.
I've no wish to become notorious.
Roll up!
A picture of conjugal bliss!
Make the most of it,
while you still can!
You look well.
Oh! A month to go and I'm
already fatter than Prudie!
If in doubt, purge. That's our motto.
Bleed, boil, blister, sweat.
Healing is a... a science, ma'am.
- Few comprehend its mysteries.
- Or its fees.
I merely meant not everyone can
afford expensive treatments.
And sometimes does it not do better
to work with nature's remedies?
- And you are...?
- Dr Dwight Enys.
He's here to make a study
of mine diseases.
He's come to the right place.
Not if he cares to eat.
The only cases are miners,
and they rarely pay.
I wonder if healing
is not its own reward?
When you're living under a
hedge and dining off thistles,
perhaps you'll care to revisit
that question, sir.
How's Grambler?
Mortgaged to the hilt,
running out of ore,
the price of copper tumbling.
Perhaps we'll all be sleeping
under hedges soon!
Stop playing with him, Mark. Come on!
I am undone,
there be no living,
none,
if Bertram be away.
'Twere all one that I should
love a bright particular star
and think to wed it.
He is so above me.
In his bright radiance
and collateral light
must I be comforted,
not in his sphere...
My love?
It's just an ache.
I'll maybe stretch my legs awhile.
Back so soon?
Oh, I hate to see your pain, my dear.
I hate to see yours.
Get the linen.
I could prescribe a remedy.
One that lives near Truro
and captains a ship.
I never think of him, Demelza.
I pray you do likewise.
I must have something to divert me!
Ah, Judas!
Where's that brandy wine?
Perhaps we should go upstairs.
All yet seems well
and if it end so meet,
the bitter past,
and more welcome is the sweet.
Should we expect an
announcement soon?
You may soon find you've
an announcement of your own.
How did we make something so perfect?
I am afeared, Ross,
that I love her too much.
It will hurt so much
more if things go amiss.
I promise you...
I will make the world
a better place for her.
I will be a better man for her sake.
And for me?
I'm already a better
man because of you.
Ross and Demelza have a daughter.
I wish them well.
'Tis Mistress Poldark from Trenwith.
Please, don't get up.
Ross ain't here and Julia's sleeping.
'Tis you I came to see.
I?
Er... some refreshment.
I beg you, do not trouble yourself.
That's very pretty.
Oh, it's just a fancy I had,
to make her a keepsake.
I know it is not made
of gold, or silver.
Or even copper!
It's made of something more precious.
A mother's love for her child
surpasses all other loves,
does it not?
I'm not sure Ross would
care to hear that!
Nor Francis!
Men do not understand such things.
'Julia Grace Poldark, '
I baptize thee in the
name of the Father,
and of the Son...
and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.
Congratulations, Ross.
This is Ross's doing!
I said I wanted two christenings,
one for his sort and one for mine.
And where do I fit in?
You fit in everywhere.
You are like Ross.
Whereas I...
I can scarce breathe.
What's there to fear?
That my stays are so
tight they'll burst?
I'm surprised Captain Poldark allows
such riffraff in his house.
But perhaps he's been obliged
to lower his standards of late.
Getting much sleep, Ross?
I've no complaints.
A child changes everything.
So does owning a mine.
Neither can be ignored.
Much as one tries!
My wife is perfection, is she not?
God knows what I've
done to deserve her.
The curse of the Poldarks.
Once given, our hearts
are not easily withdrawn.
They're very different.
Yes.
Yet each has something
the other lacks.
Perhaps you'd like them both(?)
Perhaps I would!
I envy you.
My charmed life?
Is it not charmed?
Has it not comfort and
purpose and certainty?
This is Cornwall, Dwight.
Nothing is certain!
As we feared. Choake sold
his shares in Leisure.
To whom?
(Oh, damn!)
- Your health and prosperity, Ross!
- And yours, George,
particularly in the light
of your recent acquisition.
Ah, my shares in Wheal Leisure? You
must take that as a compliment.
Oh, I do. Clearly you know a
fine investment when you see it!
What of the other shareholders?
Two or three more wish to sell.
We must buy them out.
- How?
- No idea.
But I'll starve before I see another
piece of Leisure in his hands.
Has Ruth Treneglos finished
dissecting me?
Don't mind her, dear. She
cannot spoil a splendid day.
Oh, Verity!
I wish you could have this, too.
Don't waste another moment
on such thoughts.
Who be this, then, just as
we run out o' likky pie?
'Tis like a blathering
funeral procession!
It can't be...
Mr Carne!
How do you do, sir?
Mrs Carne, glad you were
able to join us, ma'am.
This way.
Step no further, Nelly.
This be a place of
filth and abomination.
Shame on you, daughter...
to mix with such dandical folk
when your own flesh and blood
should take precedence.
And so they shall, sir.
Allow me to introduce you
to my friends and family,
beginning with your granddaughter.
This way, Mr Carne.
My cousin Francis, my friends
John and Ruth Treneglos,
Dr Dwight Enys.
Your servant, sir.
No servant o' mine!
And no friend neither.
Cover yourself, missy!
Your place is to be
decent and modest,
not... laying out wares
for men to slaver over.
Damn your insolence!
John, did you hear what he said?
You impudent swine!
Make apology or I'll have
the coat off your back!
Have a care, John. John,
you are both my guests
and I couldn't permit you
to strike my father-in-law.
Nay, let him come!
I've been in the ring,
I can hold me own!
Hold your tongue, sir!
If we want your opinion, we'll ask.
John, allow me, as host, to
apologise for any offence caused.
Well... if Ruth is satisfied.
Naturally, if Ross wishes to
protect his new relative...
allowances should be made...
for those who don't know any better.
I thought the players had moved on?
They had!
She did tell me she'd return.
I never thought she would!
You must catch her while you can.
I mean to.
- Keren!
- Like a lamb to the slaughter.
They've gone.
And good riddance!
Blasted hypocrites!
Why did they come?
Because I invited them.
They meant to shame and disgrace me.
Well, they failed.
In a week it will all be forgot.
Not by me.
I did miss 'ee.
How much?
I scarce did eat.
They all say that.
I can't stay here long and
tomorrow I shall be gone.
And when return?
Happen I shan't.
Not ever?
What's to keep me here?
Find her a home? Within a week?
How? Why?
It's the condition of her
agreeing to marry him.
Well, you could help them.
There's a cottage at Mellin.
It's in no fit state to live in.
Does she love him?
She says so.
Does he love her?
Besotted.
Then they should marry.
Because?
Love SHOULD conquer all.
Even if it requires a little help.
On the contrary!
Some obstacles cannot be overcome...
and should not, for the
peace of all concerned.
He would have enjoyed today.
He'd have revelled in it.
The great... patriarch
and leader of men!
Is that to be disdained?
It's... to be lived up to.
And can you not?
It was a question, not a judgment.
Shall Papa read to you now?
Papa... has business
to attend to in town.
Will you be gone long?
As long as it takes to raise capital
to buy out our nervous shareholders.
Are you ready?
Well, pick me liver! What's
the blatherin' rush?
Sneakin' an' slidin'
an' slitherin' about -
'tedn't right, 'tedn't
fit, tedn't proper.
We must be done and back by
five or Julia will suffer.
Let's get gone.
Thank you, sir!
'What brings you to town?'
Insane optimism?
The fond hope that my banker
can drum up sufficient capital
to buy out our
discontented shareholders.
- Before selling to the Warleggans.
- I wish you well.
Let us change the subject.
By all means. Did you hear
of the riots in Launceston?
Are you surprised?
People can only starve for so
long while the rich get fat.
In France, they make their feelings
known with hatchets and pikes.
They may do so here, soon.
Copper prices have fallen again.
God knows when Grambler
last paid full wages.
The industry's on its knees.
What's to be done?
Sit tight and wait
for the price to rise.
Thank you.
We're all committed to
short-term loan repayments.
If we don't sell cheap,
we don't sell at all.
Of course, if the smelting
companies were honestly run...
Are they not?
It's a ring. They don't
bid against each other
so the price they pay
us is rock-bottom.
A pity the mines are
not in similar unity.
We could band together
and withhold supplies till
a decent price was paid.
No remedy, then?
Unless the mines were to
form a company of their own,
bid independently, purchase
ore, extract the copper,
build a smelting works.
That would keep the
shareholders happy.
I couldn't help but overhear.
You intend to form
a smelting company?
I intend nothing, sir.
I merely say that WERE the mines
to unite and create a company -
one that would bid, buy, refine
and sell their own products -
they might keep the
profit for themselves
instead of handing
it to the Warleggans.
(Absolute genius!)
May I be of service to you, ma'am?
My name is Poldark.
Did Verity send you?
No. She's no idea I've come.
No-one does.
It was made clear long ago
that Verity was not for me.
I've since moved on,
set my sights elsewhere.
You're married?
To my ship.
To my profession.
And all the better for it.
- But...
- I never think of her now!
I'm sorry you've had
a wasted journey.
If you wish to raise money
to buy out your shareholders,
you have only one option -
raise a mortgage on Nampara.
And risk the very roof over my head.
And with a wife and young
child to support.
You'd advise against.
Most emphatically.
A good day?
A frustrating day.
At least Julia's content.
She is.
But you seem very confined
here. Can you bear it?
I find it suits me well enough.
Mark Daniel's just
sent for 'ee, Cap'n.
It seems to be catching.
- What?
- Recklessness.
She's a fortunate girl.
A plaguey demandin' one!
What kind of woman
makes such conditions?
Happen she never thought he'd do it.
Well, she don't know Mark, then.
Looks like you are making progress.
No sleep for four nights!
And you're set on this girl, Mark?
- You barely know her.
- Maybe so, Ross,
but truly she is my heart's desire.
I hope she deserves you.
They don't like her.
They like Mark. She's an outsider.
So am I.
They like me. They make
allowances for you!
Is that it?!
Yes.
Oh.
We'll make it fit 'ee, Keren. It
will soon be a palace, you'll see.
I've secured lodgings for you.
That's tremendous. Where?
Mingoose Cottage. It's not
grand, but I hope it'll serve.
It will serve me...
to know who my neighbour is!
Have you been introduced
to the bride?
If he'd dance with her, she
might introduce herself.
Oh, er, at your service, ma'am.
I've been thinking, Ross.
Keren, she do have finer tastes
than I can easy stretch to.
Yes?
So could 'ee maybe find
me extra work at the mine?
I'd like to say yes, Mark.
But it depends on how we
fare in tomorrow's auction.
So, there you have it.
The copper auction is tomorrow.
As usual, the price will be fixed
by the smelting companies.
And I've no means to
buy out our shareholders
without risking all we have.
This house, our land...
our very livelihood.
You must be regretting your marriage
to such a destitute rogue!
Must I?
After what you brought me to?
Am I now such a great lady
as to forget where I'd
be if we'd never met?
What?
Women.
None are created equal.
Some... are never satisfied.
Some could never be brought so low.
And others thumb their nose at adversity
and roll up their sleeves!
Perhaps you wish you'd
married a rich lady?!
I'm quite aware of my good
fortune, I assure you.
Shall we ask Papa how
much copper we sent?
- "We"?
- Our mine.
Grambler... to the auction.
One parcel or two?
Mama's becoming quite the expert.
- We must hope for a good price.
- Though we know we shan't get it!
And unless the price goes sky-high,
Papa will have to start
pawning the family jewels.
Francis...
Perhaps someone will
make a bid for Mama.
Gentlemen. Gentlemen.
The auction is now open.
I have first to dispose of
a dole of ore from Grambler.
45 tonnes.
- Disastrous. - A scandal.
- Disgrace!
Every single parcel gone
for half its true value.
We'll be paying them
to take it off us next.
You realise you've been uncommonly
dull since you became a father?
- My apologies.
- No matter, I've a remedy.
Seeing what little entertainment
your life affords,
I have procured you an invitation.
- To what?
- The ultimate house party.
- And if that doesn't put a smile on your face...
- Gentlemen.
I take it you feel no satisfaction
at the business done today?
Who the devil could?
Then, may I trouble you
to step this way a moment?
We'd like your word that nothing
that passes between us
goes any further.
Jinny... put the tetty pie to cool.
I'll walk out to meet Ross.
'A smelting company?'
Run by the mines themselves?
Well, it all rings very agreeable,
but you'd be biting
off no end of trouble.
We know that, sir. The smelting
companies will want no competition.
- And the Warleggans will be behind 'em.
- But all of us here
are willing to stand together
and some of us can lay our hands
- on a measure of cash.
- But it requires secrecy.
So before we proceed,
who wishes to join us?
What do you say, Ross?
Too risky a venture?
It was your cousin who
first suggested it.
Did he?
We can't go on as we are.
And I would rather fail fighting,
than throw up my hands
and wait for the end.
And Mr Francis Poldark?
My finances are, at present...
somewhat complicated.
So, I cannot, at this time, join you.
But I wish you well...
Gentlemen. I do, indeed.
And who is to be your leader?
Is it you, Tonkin?
Oh, no, sir. I'm not
at all the right man,
but we're all agreed on who is.
A house party!
At George Warleggan's.
Think of that, my lamb.
Your mother's a lady,
your father's a gent.
His name goes back hundreds of
years and a good name it is.
Mistress Poldark! Forgive me,
I don't mean to alarm you,
but I must speak.
Good news or bad?
Both. The auction was dismal, but...
I still have a job?
And I have a new one.
I was unmannerly. I'm
a man of strong temper
and to control it has been
the work of a lifetime,
but God forbid that I should quarrel
with those who wish me well.
- Captain Blamey, I cannot stay.
- Hear me out, I beg you.
Since your visit, I
have been in turmoil.
I thought that I had put
her behind me, but...
I had not.
- Mr Francis cannot be part of the new smelting company?
- Will not.
Nor others who bank
with the Warleggans.
If their names were known, George
would call in their debts.
To a man, they'd be ruined.
But I may have found a compromise.
Those who bank with Warleggans
will keep their names secret.
Those who bank elsewhere will
let their names be known.
I bank with Pascoe, so
George cannot touch me.
What do you want of me?
To ask you... Am I to hope?
With her father deceased,
do I have a chance?
May I see her? How? When?
I don't know. My husband,
he mustn't see you here.
Is he against me, too?
He wasn't before.
He's against me stirring up
what should be left alone.
- He'll be on his way home soon. I must go.
- Will you tell Verity?
No... I think, not yet.
I'll send word.
Bless you, ma'am.
I will not fail you.
Nor her.
You seem excitable.
Is something amiss?
Nothing, no.
Only, a letter came, inviting
us to George Warleggan's party.
I'm that glad! It'll make
up for the christening.
Now I'll show that I
CAN wear fine clothes
and behave all genteel, along
with the best of them.
- That you will not.
- Why?
It's not that kind of party.
Oh.
Oh, don't look so sorry for yourself.
It'll be nothing but
gaming and toping
and dawn-to-dusk business talk.
Will you go, then?
If only to please Francis and
throw George off the scent
of my latest ventures, but
at least you can be spared.
Going somewhere?
Hmmm. To town.
To what purpose?
Urgent business. I need a new cloak
and Verity must help me choose.
- What?
- The choosing of cloaks.
May that always be the
worst of your worries!
Now, don't delay me, I
have a party to attend.
Jud! Bring the horses.
You spoil me.
Do you like it?
I like to be appreciated.
Who doesn't?
Does your wife not appreciate you?
My wife... tries to
make me a better man.
Like your father?
I will never be that man.
Could you take me to Miss Verity?
This way, ma'am.
Are you joining this urgent
trip to the dressmakers?
Because shopping and dressing
up are the only things of matter
- to us women? - Not at all.
- They are, of course,
but I hesitate to buy ribbons when
our copper can scarce be given away.
Besides, Francis has more
urgent calls on his purse.
- Such as?
- Gaming,
entertaining. Oh, himself,
not his wife. Nor his workers.
They are not remotely entertained,
though I dare say she is,
- lavishly.
- Elizabeth, I wish... - There was something you could do?
Oh, I wish it, too, Ross.
But we are beyond
wishing, are we not?
Next time, I hope to join you.
Were you not afraid?
The look in their eyes?
I've seen the like before,
in Luggan once, when
we were out of corn.
Empty bellies make for such looks.
And his grandfather was a blacksmith?
How is it possible?
To leap from poverty to
wealth in two generations?
And maintain it in
the midst of a slump,
while men like you
and Francis face ruin!
We have different ways
of doing business.
- Who is that?
- The infamous Matthew Sanson?
- Mill owner and corn merchant.
- Does his infamy extend beyond
bankrupting Francis?
It extends almost everywhere
and he has George's endorsement,
- which makes him...
- A force to be reckoned with. - A man of means,
though, sadly, not of generosity.
Is that collar not a gift of his?
No, indeed. The giver
was a man of taste.
Could you manage without me,
while I visit the chandler?
On no account. You
must help me choose.
What do you think of this
one? Or this one, perhaps?
Miss Verity?
A physician, sir?
Pray, what do you
prescribe for boredom?
It's not a condition
I'm familiar with, sir.
Doubtless, you will have
opportunities to study it.
I suspect not, sir.
The patients I tend rarely suffer
from that affliction. Your health.
A pity he hasn't your skill
at cards... or in other ways.
- He'll shortly be ruined.
- And you will have done with him.
As his wife did long ago.
- Do all men come to regret their choice?
- I couldn't say.
Do you?
I regret nothing.
Come the day, you know
where to find me.
You was always my weakness, milord.
For so long, I never dared to hope,
but such a chance as this...
Captain Blamey, may I
introduce you to my cousin,
Mistress Demelza Poldark,
Ross's wife.
I'm honoured, ma'am.
And I, sir.
May I beg the pleasure of your company,
for a cordial or a coffee?
- That would be...
- No!
Thank you, sir. We cannot.
No good can come of it.
I bid you good day.
What are the stakes?
- You wouldn't wish to know.
- On the contrary.
You'll find out soon enough.
Pray excuse me, gentlemen.
A pleasure... as always.
Get off!
Verity... would it have been
so very bad to hear him out?
- He can have nothing to say that I wish to hear.
- Nothing?
Oh! Verity! Miners!
Will you believe me if I
say it gives me no pleasure
to see Francis beggar himself?
Business is business.
- It's not my business to bankrupt a friend.
- So you leave it
to a third party and your
conscience is clear.
I thank you for your hospitality.
Miss Verity, I beg you, if
you would only hear me out.
I cannot. I cannot!
- These people should be flogged!
- Be careful, Mr Sanson, sir.
Pay for it, damn you! 15 shillings
a bushel is the price!
15 shillings a bushel
and not a penny less!
All these years, I've
thought of none but you.
I've been waiting, in the
hope that, one day...
I cannot bear it, Andrew. Are
we to endure it all again?
- The parting and the heartache?
- No. Not the parting.
I swear to you, never the parting.
- We should leave. It is not safe here.
- Of course. Follow me.
Damn! I know who you are!
Get out of it!
Get out!
And I could not for the life of me
choose between the blue or grey,
- so I came away with none.
- I'm sorry you had a wasted journey.
Did you hear anything of the riots?
With our heads full
of muslin and calico?
Verity, we must try again next
week. Can you spare the time?
I can.
And how was the party?
Dull as you feared?
Duller.
I don't imagine we've seen
the last of the unrest.
I wonder how Verity and I missed it.
But we'd so much to talk of,
we barely noticed another soul.
Verity seemed in high spirits.
She did, indeed.
I'm that glad. She deserves
to be content.
She should make the most of it.
Why?
Her life is about to change...
and not for the better.
It was monstrous crowded in Truro.
Kenwyn Street was a boiling of miners
- and there was talk of a riot.
- There will be rioting closer to home soon.
All these years...
Damn, it was old afore I was born.
Old John Trenwith
- cut the first goffin the year afore he died.
- 200 years ago.
- And never closed. Not once.
- Not long since, it yielded thousands a year.
It don't seem right. It
don't seem right, at all.
What's this?
- Shall you tell her?
- Or shall I let you have the pleasure?
For months now, you know that
Grambler has been failing.
- She means, Francis has been failing!
- We could no longer afford
- the repayments on the loans.
- Thanks to his profligacy and mismanagement!
So, in an attempt to recoup these
losses, Francis today staked...
- Gambled... - .. the mine.
- Mmm.
On a game of cards.
He lost.
What does this mean?
For Francis?
Loss of income, loss of pride...
loss of family inheritance.
For Verity and Elizabeth? A sharp
decline in their standard of living.
For the Warleggans?
A chance to tighten
their stranglehold,
by closing down a rival mine.
And for the poor souls
who worked there?
Unimaginable hardship.
All because one man was weak
and others were greedy.
So often, I've envied Elizabeth.
Why?
Why did you envy Francis?
There's no need for you to come.
Elizabeth!
What I did was unforgiveable...
but my love for you...
my love will... always...
My friends...
this has been a Poldark
mine for over 200 years.
Generations of all our families
have worked it together.
It was my dearest wish that
my own son take it up,
but... time and... circumstance
have ruined that hope.
It may be that we shall
all meet here again...
to see her resurrection, but...
for the... present...
um...
It is... it is now 12 noon.
Elizabeth.
What can I do?
Not once has Francis
asked me that question.
He's afraid to.
You must know this was never
what he intended for you.
And yet, it is how it is.
And we shall weather it.
Retrench, make economies.
There are many worse off than we.
Let Francis feel sorry for himself.
I will not do so.
He'll need to watch his step.
He's young.
And handsome!
And green.
And free.
Do you envy him?
Sometimes.
You were right.
The world is a harder place now.
The stakes are higher.
Losses more painful.
Yet, I would not change
places with him.
My life is more precious
for being less certain
and richer for being poorer.
What does it mean?
"Resurgam"?
"I shall rise again".
Shall we?
I hope so.